+++
authors = []
date = 2018-10-22T18:30:00Z
excerpt = "With the increasing aggression from Russia to harsh policies towards it allies, the United States has increasingly begun to isolate itself from the world stage."
hero = ""
timeToRead = 0
title = "Why Trump’s Foreign policies concern global security?"

+++
After the end of the second world war, the United States begins to play a major role in global affairs, initially to counteract the Soviet Union’s aggression through various interventions and alliances such as NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization), and later for stability in volatile regions such as the Middle East and Africa throughout the 21st Century. Today, any major foreign policy has to factor in the United States and their influence in the region. However, in 2016, Donald Trump became the 45th president of the United States. His policies mainly focused on domestic issues by compromising on international issues, making the United States more isolated.

This wasn’t the case before, as a matter of fact, the United States had never contributed to global security before the start of World War 1, and even after the end of it, they would limit their involvement until the second World War. Post-World War 2, the United States realized it needs to play a crucial role in global security, and so the successive presidents have taken similar steps.

However, Donald Trump has taken another approach for American involvement and its role in global politics. He has imposed tariffs on steel and aluminium on its allies such as the EU and Canada, pulled out of the Trans-pacific pact(TPP), threatens to pull out of NAFTA (North American Free Trade Agreement), taking a soft approach towards Russia, despite sufficient evidence of its meddling in the 2016 presidential elections (And not to mention the annexation of Crimea), demands from its NATO allies to have equal defence expenditure, pulled out of the Iran Nuclear Deal and decided to reduce the trade deficit with China, resulting in an ongoing trade war.

Trump’s trade policies have mainly been focused around the zero-sum game, (where one persons or entities gains equals the other persons or entities loss) and bringing back the jobs in the US, which is believed to be taken up by other countries through unfair trade deals. This also correlates to the reason why Trump pulled the US out of the Paris Climate Agreement, stating he is protecting the coal miners in his own country. This zero-sum game also relates to the ongoing trade war with China, where he believes the imposition of tariffs will reduce the current deficit they have with China.

Unlike his predecessor, Barack Obama, Trump has taken a softer approach towards Russia, making comments of being friends with Russian President Vladimir Putin and even supports and praises him often on social media. Apart from that, Trump has also denied Russian melding in the 2016 elections, contradicting the findings of his own agencies.

Trump has repeatedly criticized NATO allies to pay as much as the United States have to the NATO budget, stating that the United States has been footing majority of the bill, with smaller nations not paying enough or at all. This has created strained relations between the US and NATO members, with Trump even at once planning to pull out of the treaty altogether.

While many suggest this to be a very drastic way to conduct foreign affairs, many people are saying that such policies have been in the mainstream before, that is, such actions are not new for America. They argue that the united states in the past have maintained close ties such as Nixon’s support to Mao, to present-day monarchies of Saudi Arabia, one of their closest allies in the middle east, and other Gulf states. Furthermore, trade deals such as NAFTA and TPP were already heavily criticized by both sides of the political spectrum, with NAFTA deal barely passing in 1999. Lastly, United States have asked for concessions in the past from its allies, while not as directly as trump has, but through other methods such as purchasing US-made military equipment and not accepting a soviet gas pipeline during the cold war and so on. While Trump has a different way to convey the message and his actions, such policies have their roots in the post-world war 2 politics. Even after that, Trump has involved himself in other global issues such as the denuclearization of North Korea.

While it is hard to deny that Trump’s policies have references to previous administrations and their actions, one can argue that the timing and the method of implementing such policies are horribly wrong. For example, asking for concessions from its NATO allies and threatening to pull out of the alliance comes at a time after Russia’s annexation of Crimea, raising fears that it might annex back the states in the Baltic. Furthermore, Trump’s policies on trade further distance the United States from its allies and supporting Putin at a time where it has been confirmed that Russia did meddle in the 2016 presidential elections further creates doubt whether the current administration will be able to keep Russian aggression in check. The repercussions of pulling out of the Iran Nuclear Deal is yet to be felt. While the US might want to involve itself in fewer global affairs, the withdrawal from such trade and possible military presence might create a vacuum, which could be filled by Russia or China, who is already filling the vacuum with its BELT initiative.

In reality, Trump does not have a foreign policy, but the policies that he is undertaking is hampering not only the United States’ presence in the world but also the status quo after the second world war. While everyone can agree that US involvement is needed for global security, this involvement also includes good relations with its allies, negotiating peace deals and creating trade deals beneficial to all parties. While Trump’s concerns are valid and have references to previous US policies, it is to be noted that each policy has its time and purpose, neither of which Trump is able to understand.